+++
draft = false
pin = false
type = "publication"
summary = "We report emerging mobile colistin resitance between the years of 2012 and 2017"
cover = ""

abstract = "Colistin is a last-resort antibiotic for multidrug-resistant Gram-negative infections. Recently, the ninth allele of the mobile colistin resistance (*mcr*) gene family, designated *mcr*-9, was reported. However, its clinical and public health significance remains unclear. We queried genomes of carbapenem-resistant *Enterobacterales* (CRE) for mcr-9 from a convenience sample of clinical isolates collected between 2012 and 2017 through the Georgia Emerging Infections Program, a population- and laboratory-based surveillance program. Isolates underwent phenotypic characterization and whole-genome sequencing. Phenotypic characteristics, genomic features, and clinical outcomes of *mcr*-9-positive and -negative CRE cases were then compared. Among 235 sequenced CRE genomes, 13 (6%) were found to harbor *mcr*-9, all of which were *Enterobacter cloacae* complex. The median MIC and rates of heteroresistance and inducible resistance to colistin were similar between *mcr*-9-positive and -negative isolates. However, rates of resistance were higher among *mcr*-9-positive isolates across most antibiotic classes. All cases had significant health care exposures. The 90-day mortality was similarly high in both *mcr*-9-positive (31%) and -negative (7%) CRE cases. Nucleotide identity and phylogenetic analysis did not reveal geotemporal clustering. *mcr*-9-positive isolates had a significantly higher number of median [range] antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes (16 [4 to 22] versus 6 [2 to 15]; P < 0.001) than did *mcr*-9-negative isolates. Pangenome tests confirmed a significant association of *mcr*-9 detection with mobile genetic element and heavy metal resistance genes. Overall, the presence of *mcr*-9 was not associated with significant changes in colistin resistance or clinical outcomes, but continued genomic surveillance to monitor for emergence of AMR genes is warranted."

authors = ["Ahmed Babiker", "Chris Bower", "Joseph D. Lutgring", "***Robert A. Petit III***", "Jessica Howard-Anderson", "Uzma Ansari", "Gillian McAllister", "Michelle Adamczyk", "Erin Breaker", "Sarah W. Satola", "Jesse T. Jacob", "Michael H. Woodworth"]
date = "2022-07-20"
journal = "*Microbiology Spectrum*"
title = "Clinical and Genomic Epidemiology of mcr-9-Carrying Carbapenem-Resistant *Enterobacterales* Isolates in Metropolitan Atlanta, 2012 to 2017."
tags =  ["mcr", "resitance", "cre"]
doi = "10.1128/spectrum.02522-21"
pdf = "/pdf/2022-mcr9.pdf"
citation = "Babiker, A., Bower, C., Lutgring, J. D., Petit, R. A., 3rd, Howard-Anderson, J., Ansari, U., McAllister, G., Adamczyk, M., Breaker, E., Satola, S. W., Jacob, J. T., & Woodworth, M. H. Clinical and Genomic Epidemiology of mcr-9-Carrying Carbapenem-Resistant *Enterobacterales* Isolates in Metropolitan Atlanta, 2012 to 2017. Microbiology Spectrum, 10(4), e0252221. (2022))"
+++
